I guess the first question everybody is asking you is, why?
Why did I do that?
Well, are you obsessed?
Oh, I was engaged.
I'm obsessed with music as well, so I have a number of obsessions.
But I certainly became
in this project, partly because of another translation that I had not discovered, but come across in connection with some other work I was doing.
This is a German translation by Buber and Rosenzweig, and that was so unusual that it, I guess you could say, inspired me to experiment a little bit on my own, just with a chapter or two, just for fun.
to see what would happen, and the result was so different than anything I'd ever seen that it really intrigued me.
Working from what texts here?
Myself, you mean?
Yeah.
Working from a standard Hebrew text, but, you know, with commentaries and all the paraphernalia that scholars use.
Now, of course, there are five books here, and this took, what, 27 years?
Well, from beginning to end, yeah.
I didn't live a hermit's life and do nothing else from beginning to end.
But again, there were other scholarly things that you were doing there at the meantime.
There were some.
I really wanted to do this more than anything.
This was really the focus of what I wanted to do.
I saw it as a combination of scholarly and artistic endeavor.
And the premise being what?
What are the shortcomings of other interests?
The shortcomings of other translations, such as they are, are that they have as their focus the language into which they're translating.
They're trying to create an English text which is comfortable and flowing and idiomatic, which is always a goal of translation, but you can lose a lot when you do that as well.
If you try and put it in a 20th century English voice, then you miss some of the ancient dress, some of the rough feel of the Hebrew.
And so I started seeing that it was possible to do it another way as a balance to that.
And I also saw that that was helpful to me and to other people in getting them to rethink and re-hear these very familiar stories and texts.
Is it, in your view, a Bible then for your generation, or do you, I don't know, I hope, on the other hand?
Yeah, I hope it will last.
I don't see it, you know, aimed at a particular generation.
It certainly comes out of a particular generation.
I mean, the fact that I started it in the late 60s is probably not completely accidental, although I'd like to think that it is.
But, you know, every generation has to discover the classics for itself, you know, whether you're an actor or a musician or
or whatever you are, you always go back to the classics, but it doesn't mean that you accept the way they've always been done.
It's been said that every generation requires its own edition of Shakespeare.
Yeah, sure, that's right.
And I wonder if you feel similarly about... Sure, sure.
I don't see this as the translation for the 90s.
This is not a translation which takes the text and bends it to
to ideological concerns.
It's not like some recent translations that try to address issues of sexism and so on.
I won't go out of my way to avoid those, but I'm trying to reproduce the text in the way that I hear it.
If it's an ancient text, that's what it is.
I'm not trying to doctor it up.
I think when people say 27 years, but you have to go, for me, I love notes,
I love annotations, and I just love all this stuff.
Of course, I imagine writing these... That was hard.
That was harder than the translation.
I bet it was.
Yeah, because I had to put myself in the shoes of some imaginary reader and figure out what would be useful answers, or what were the questions, really, that I thought people would be interested in, and what were simply and clearly written answers.
Do you have, actually, a reader in mind?
Well, partly a reader who cares enough to read the book, not just to zoom through something that's easy, but who cares to linger a little bit for a little while.
When you say the book, you're fortunate as a book with a small V or a capital V?
Both, really.
You know, I mean, it's, you can't... I mean, this is a literary exercise as much as it is.
Yeah, it's a literary exercise, but you can't ignore what it is.
Much as one would like to sometimes... Do so at your palate.
Well, right, I mean, you can't do that.
Remember, I've approached it also, in a way, as a teacher, as one who wants to guide the reader a little bit and supply information that he or she might not
encounter otherwise.
In many settings where the Bible was read, let's say in a church or synagogue, sometimes there is a commentary on the side, but often there isn't.
And so people are left to sit there and react to the words, but the words aren't always clear, and they're sometimes difficult.
It is rather unusual, isn't it, that the Bible should be a translation?
be attempted by one person.
This is kind of a project.
Well, yeah, I mean, don't forget, this is still only part one, so, you know.
Is it the Old Testament that you're going to be playing?
This is, you know, the project is the Old Testament.
I mean, I've just done part one of four, so we're not there yet, you know.
It's a little bit unusual, although, you know, early on in the history of the English Bible, there were individuals like Tim Dale,
Well, we try not to mention that.
And also, there were a couple of gentlemen early in the century.
Was it Goodspeed, I think?
And also, what's his name?
A Scottish guy.
There have been several other attempts like that.
And attending.
There was a wonderful book.
I guess, was it Yale University Press?
A Modern English Spelling, the big one?
Yeah, but there was also a book about Tyndale, and actually it was by the same fellow, I think, who brought out that.
Daniel, I think is the one?
Yeah, I just bought, actually, the translation itself a couple weeks ago.
It's real interesting.
I didn't realize that so much of the Tyndale Bible went into the King James.
Oh, yeah.
He's really the one who did it.
He's the man.
And you talk about the great ironies.
I mean, he went abroad, they hunted him down, and...
And Sir Thomas More was one of the champions of Chase, and then, of course, along comes the King James.
Well, even within a few years of his death, they allowed English translation, so he really just missed it.
He missed the deadline, you might say, unfortunately.
I guess it is a little unusual for one person to do it, but I did it partly because it felt like to have some kind of unified vision would be helpful.
I've
I haven't done a lot of interviews with translators, but it certainly does fascinate me, because those that I have talked with usually contend, and also people who are translated, that the book, when it's rendered into another language, almost becomes a different work.
Well, it does, it does.
Sure, I mean, that's certainly true of the Bible itself.
community has read it over the centuries, it has become a different book anyway, regardless of whether they even translate it or not.
One of the fascinating things about the Bible is that it remains the same on the page, but it magically changes depending on who's got a hold of it.
So even when it's not translated, it means different things to different people.
And it may be because we invest so much of ourselves in the book.
It always changes, but the translations have certainly created other works.
Not the legitimate, it's just other.
Of course, it certainly does the structure.
It really does flow like poetry now, doesn't it?
Yeah, well, that's why we tried to do a little bit to bring out that oral quality.
Also, to slow readers down.
Instead of zipping through a paragraph, you have to weigh the lines and see what's being said.
Is this a case of actually, I don't know, writing my own book, I don't mean to talk about myself, but I'm one of these persons of every sense, I mean, you're endlessly polishing sentences, and of course with the computers, it's a blessing and a curse.
Are you one of these obsessive
people when it comes to really insisting on the perfect, precise work?
As close as you can get, you know.
But until you're happy with it.
Do you wake up in the night and say, aha, that's it?
Once in a while, yeah.
Just solutions, seeking solutions.
Absolutely.
I mean, that's part of the fun of it, is that it becomes a puzzle, you know, something to be solved.
And then, you know, you settle on it, and six months later you change your mind.
You hear somebody read it out loud and say, no, no, no, that's not right.
So it is a curse.
You know, if you're a musician, you can come out the next night and do it better for an actor.
Are you a musician?
Oh, well, on an amateur level, but I listen to a lot of music.
You don't play any musicians?
Well, of course.
No, I used to play the piano.
I did a little singing.
It probably helps to have a hearing, though, doesn't it?
I would think so.
Do you read any of this aloud?
Oh, yeah.
In fact, when I do the final draft, I usually record the Hebrew text, and then I play it back and follow the English with it to get a sense of, you know, I'm on the left track.
And so it takes a long time.
And is your wife conscripted to be with everybody?
Not as much for that.
You know, I mean, she's kind of busy herself.
She would love to do that, but time doesn't always work out, though.
And where did you work?
She's a rabbi, really, actually.
In where?
In Cambridge.
Now, you're obviously an academic and a teacher, but a professional translator as well, right?
Well, I don't know.
I mean, I make my living as a professor, so the translation is my scholarly pursuit.
I don't translate for a living in the sense of get phone calls from people who read material translated.
No, it's really focused on this.
And this is the only language that you would work for?
There are translators who do work on a variety of languages.
Yeah, yeah, no, I don't do anything else, although I know that there was this German piece that was useful.
I don't translate books from German.
I guess sometimes the best translators actually are people who are not native to the time.
I don't know if that's true.
I don't know.
William Weaver has a tagline, so it's wonderful.
Wasn't it Pasternak who translated Shakespeare into the Russian ones?
That's one of the reasons that Shakespeare is so beloved in Russian, because Pasternak was the translator.
Well, right.
You created the classic and you took a poet to do it.
It's often said also that the only great literary work produced by a committee is the King James Bible.
It's true.
It's amazing what they did.
I don't know how the committee was able to do it.
They didn't pull that off.
They did.
Well, they were very conscientious and they were good scholars.
I think it had something to do with the fact that they lived at a time when the level of English was so rich and high.
They were living at exactly the best time to produce an English classic.
Not that they don't deserve credit, but the atmosphere was such.
Look at the people who were around.
Well, right.
If Shakespeare and Ben Johnson are your local playwrights, then how far back can they be?
Anthony Burgess actually writes, wrote that, he made a case for Shakespeare working on that book.
Oh, really?
That's interesting.
He picks one of the psalms that he suggests that he did, and he says Shakespeare, there's such and such a word he changed to Shakespeare.
In other words, he changed the spear.
Oh, no.
That's cute.
You never know.
Maybe he did.
Why not?
Threw in a song.
I love it.
It's kind of cute.
Are you mindful when you're doing this?
I'm glad I'm doing the Bible.
This is a big deal.
I don't want to mess this up.
Yeah.
It's also a time when there are many translations around.
So, you know, if I were the only one doing this in the last 50 years, I might feel differently about it.
I feel that I have a lot of colleagues who are working on similar things, and so I see myself as one of them.
I don't, I'm not the only alternative way to do this.
At what point did it come, the shotgun Bible?
At some point last year.
Not really.
I think.
I mean, my aim was certainly to do the five books, and then to take a deep breath and see what was happening.
But that's wonderful, man.
Was it under contract at that point, or all this stuff?
Well, no, it's been under contract since 1981.
With Schocken?
With Schocken.
Which is, fortunately for me, now a part of Random House.
And so, you know, it was due to five books, although there was some discussion about going on.
But then, you know, with any project like this, you try and finish the first part, and then you see where you are.
But it's appropriate to see it as a long term.
It must be rewarding.
responsiveness.
Who could have anticipated a page one of you in the United States?
I really didn't.
It's gotten a lot of attention and I suppose that has something to do with the general tenor of things these days.
Searching for spirituality and maybe despairing over the budget talks and whatever else is going on.
Do you ever feel that you're toiling in
you know, I'm doing this, and will anybody care?
No, that has never bothered me, because there were always, from the beginning, there were always at least small groups of people who were interested, and who used even drafts to study.
That's good.
That's important.
I mean, I've talked to a couple of good friends of mine who are musicians, and one of the great things about being a
musician is that you can instantly respond to your work.
That's right.
You know, you perform something on the stage, and you know immediately.
I know that.
That has occurred to me, and it's one of the things that makes us a little bit difficult, because there is enormous delayed gratification involved.
When I have my musical fantasies, that's certainly one of the issues.
You do get much more of a direct response.
And how about the scholarly community?
Have you heard much
So far, not.
In the past, you know, I have had reactions, pro and con, of various kinds.
You know, it's pretty predictable.
Is there a sense in any quarters that maybe, you know, you're treading on... I know academics have a way of staking out draft, you know, becoming very proprietary about... I know I found this in my own work, being a journalist going out...
you know, daring to go into an area that somebody spent 30 years doing, you know, like Henry Huntington.
I spent 30 years of his life doing a biography of Henry Huntington.
I was just out interested in some, I mean, I was like I was a, you know.
A trespasser?
A jump over, you know.
Well, you know, look, the, the, doing a project like this certainly gets more attention than a, than a narrower technical
I suppose that is frustrating to people.
But I think from the beginning I was interested in reaching a wide audience.
You know, were you mindful?
There are Bibles out there that are quite politically correct.
Were you mindful at all?
Tell me about your attitude as a consideration.
Not in the translation, but in the commentary, it certainly was an issue.
Whether, you know, in stories where people wipe out some other group, or women are treated a certain way.
And I made some reference in the notes in the commentary, too.
So at least bringing up the issue.
But in the actual translation itself, how were you guided?
Really by the text?
Really by the text, yeah.
You know, when you translate the name Adam, which is really not a name, but a designation, it doesn't mean a human being.
It's not the word necessarily for male.
So there I could use humankind, and I was happy about that because that means my own approach, but only because the text permitted it.
If I felt the text didn't allow that, I would not have done it.
And Kristen, the name you used for God,
Tell me about that.
That's an awfully difficult word.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, in the Hebrew text, it's traditionally printed either that way or with substitute vowels.
So Jews traditionally for 2,000 years have not pronounced the name as written.
I wanted to convey some of that sense.
I mean, everybody, Christians included, have translated it as the Lord or something else anyway.
So I wanted to make the reader aware that there's this two-stage thing going on.
I included a whole page at the beginning of the book saying, you know, this is what you should do.
Not everybody will read that.
With a project that has taken so much time, was it difficult to maintain it?
consistent tone in the continuity, or did you have changing?
Were we all changing?
Well, yeah, I did change somewhat.
The books themselves changed somewhat, you know, so there are passages that are more flowing than others.
Because most scholars hear different voices in the text, others, you know, they're maybe pieces from different traditions, and so the vocabulary changes.
There are some passages that are long and did, and others that are incredibly brief.
So I tried to
really follow the terrain of the text and not impose one monolithic tone on it if I could.
I don't know if I'm succeeding.
What's your timetable for the remaining four books?
Well, I hope the next book will be done in about three years.
And beyond that, we're still trying to figure out.
And you're how old now?
48.
It won't take until I'm 100.
You can do it at C&C at 3 by the time you're 60 at least.
Yeah, I would think so.
And where are you now?
Well, I'm doing some material on book two.
I've already done pieces of it in the past, you know, for courses and other things.
Clearly you don't want to be rushed.
You enjoy this.
Yeah, I enjoy it.
There's no sense in being rushed because you want to weigh what's out there.
There's good scholarship out there and discoveries and various other things.
Yeah, it's a slow process.
Were there any big surprises for you remaining with the text?
You knew very well, and yet when you couldn't translate it.
I think that I haven't really paid enough attention to the way in which everything is woven together.
It's a very extraordinary text.
If you look at ancient books, there are plenty of books that
that are parallel to what's in here.
So there are other books that have stories about creation.
There are other books that have lists of laws.
There are other books that talk about sacrifices and other books of poetry.
But there's literally nothing else that I know of in the ancient world that combines all of them and weaves them in and out.
So in a book like Numbers, book four, you'll have a story and then another chapter of laws and then a poem.
It's a very unique kind of thing.
So although I knew that, when you get down on this kind of microscopic level, you really see it going on.
It's remarkable the way in which it's all woven together somehow.
It's not unified in the sense of perfectly put together architecturally, but there are echoes and there are connections that are amazing.
So that's part of it.
So you must have an enormous respect then for those who made this down.
Oh, sure.
Oh, yeah.
How about voice, getting the voice right?
Was that a problem at all?
A number of voices, and you didn't say that you saw it.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, again, you try and follow the contours of the text, and if your way of dealing with it is consistent, then it does read differently on different points.
I certainly haven't tried to impose one voice overall in the text.
I don't know, Richard James does.
you know, these poetic lines help me distinguish that.
And in creating these actual lines, I imagine you would just allow the syntax and the... Yeah, you have to rely somewhat on your ear.
There are indications in Hebrew Bibles there's an old system, it's at least a thousand years old and probably older, of reading that's...
Some people take as punctuation and others as signs to be sung.
And, you know, I certainly paid attention to that stuff.
I wasn't totally bound by it.
In the end, the divisions are a little bit arbitrary.
And do you have, I think you might have touched on this earlier, but do you have a sense of who the reader of readings and reading this book?
Well, you know, I think it will be, first of all,
people who are interested in the Bible and who are always looking for new approaches and new ways to study the text, but also intelligent adult readers who haven't looked at the Bible since they were 8 or 10 or 12 and are curious and might be surprised at what they find.
There are probably millions of people in this country whose image of the Bible is really one form when they were children, although the Bible has
wonderful stories that children can appreciate.
It's not a book for kids.
It's not a book of Bible stories.
It's very much more than that.
You mean the Bible in general is not a book for kids?
Right.
There are adult issues, and the answers are not always easy.
It's not a book for kids, though.
want to run with that for a little bit?
I mean, because they start teaching kids the Bible.
They do.
Well, there are wonderful stories there which actually appeal to children very much.
And so from that point of view, Bible stories are very useful.
But some of the themes and issues in the text are issues that adults run into, issues of conflict and exile and tragedy and so on.
You know, although we experience these things as kids also,
It's very sophisticated and very complex and takes real effort, which people don't always have in our society.
People don't read books in our society slowly.
You buy a novel to read on vacation, but to sit with a page and go through line by line and really think about why is it saying it the way it's saying it?
You wonder, will there be a paperback edition?
Well, there'll be a somewhat cheaper edition, I think, in a year.
I don't know if I should be quoted on that.
They're certainly talking about a less expensive edition that will be more easily ordered for schools.
I suspect the gold will go.
They'll keep that as a gift edition.
I do have the New York Times piece.
Are there any other pieces I should be able... Are there any interviews that might be helpful to you that might do some biographical, actual stuff that I don't... Well, there was a good NPR piece, but that was recorded.
There was a piece in the foreword that he was picked in New York fairly recently.
That was...
I think around Christmas time.
They did a pretty involved piece.
It's called The Forward.
The Forward, yeah.
It used to be used paper, now it's also in this version.
So it's a good paper.
I own the book itself, so obviously, and I don't have to take up too much of your time.
And I know where to get you if I have any more questions asked to.
So why don't we just do it?